[INTERNAL] Sit rep 2020 04 24 (#373)
nextstrain/ncov: narratives/ncov_sit-rep_2020-04-24.md

```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->

<!-- This is left-side text 2-->
# [COVID-19 Resources](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=tree&p=full&legend=closed&f_region=Africa)
We've prepared some resources that will make interpreting the data we present in this narrative easier.
#### Nextstrain Resources  
* [START HERE: How to read a phylogeny](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/trees-background/).  
* [Background on coronaviruses](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV).
* [Common misconceptions](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-13?n=11).

#### External Resources  
* [Ask a Scientist & FAQs](https://covid19.fas.org/l/en).
* [WHO Situation Reports](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports).
* [CDC Resources](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html).
* [The NYTimes COVID-19 coverage](https://www.nytimes.com/news-event/coronavirus).
<!-- There is no right-side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->

<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [A note on sampling](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=map&f_region=Africa&p=full)

> We currently have sequences from samples taken in 6 continents, including 7 African countries. This is an incredible achievement -- sequencing an unknown, large RNA virus in the midst of a pandemic is difficult, and is only possible through the incredible work and timely sharing of data by scientists and physicians around the world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We currently have sequences from samples taken in 6 continents. In Africa, we have samples from 7 countries. This is an incredible achievement -- sequencing an unknown, large RNA virus in the midst of a pandemic is difficult, and is only possible through the incredible work and timely sharing of data by scientists and physicians around the world.
```
I just think the orig wording is a little weird, it makes it sound like the continents include 7 African countries? Maybe it's just me! 😆

<!-- There is NO right-side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Many separate introductions have seeded diverse local transmission chains in Africa](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=tree,map&f_region=Africa&p=full&r=country&legend=open)
  At the time of writing, the [Africa CDC](https://africacdc.org/covid-19/) reports 26,144 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 1,247 deaths across the African Union.
  We have viral genomes from 83 of these cases from 7 African nations, shown here (in color) against a backdrop of contextual sequences from around the world (gray). We applaud the local public health departments for their rapid response and open data sharing.
  <br><br>
  These samples span the full breadth of the tree, indicating that there have been many independent introductions to the African continent.
  Many of these introductions appear to be from Europe, although this may be skewed by the fact that we have more sequences from Europe than from most other places in the world; we can't rule out the possibility of unsampled, intermediate transmissions elsewhere.
  <br><br>

>   Not all of these introductions have led to community transmission, but we see clear clusters in some locations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We don't seen evidence that all of these introductions have led to community transmission, but we see clear clusters in some locations.
```
Trying to address @cassiawag 's comment about the fact that sampling will play a role here. We could go into even more detail ("..., as we may not have sampled these clusters, but...") but don't know if we need to.

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [At least 7 introductions to the DRC](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=tree,map&f_region=Africa&p=full&r=country&legend=closed&f_country=Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo)

There are 359 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the DRC with 25 deaths. On Nextstrain, we have 36 sequences from the DRC.
<br><br>

> These sequences fall across the tree, with evidence for at least 7 separate introductions. Heuristically, introductions look like a color change between a virus sample (tips of the tree) and its ancestors (the internal nodes or branch points that lead to it). From these 7 introductions, we see evidence for at least 2 local transmission chains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These sequences fall across the tree, with evidence for at least 7 separate introductions. As shown here, introductions look like a color change between a virus sample (tips of the tree) and its ancestors (the internal nodes or branch points that lead to it). 

Here, we can see 7 places where the colors have changed from grey to orange, representing an introduction. From these 7 introductions, we see evidence for at least 2 local transmission chains.
```
I think if we're trying to stick to more basic English, better to avoid 'heuristically' :)
For the second part, take or leave - thought it was nice to tie up your very nice explanation with exactly what's shown, but just a suggestion!

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [2 local transmission chains in Kinshasa, seeded in early March](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=tree&f_country=Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&f_region=Africa&label=clade:A2a&p=full&legend=closed&m=div)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# [Two local transmission chains in Kinshasa, seeded in early March](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=tree&f_country=Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&f_region=Africa&label=clade:A2a&p=full&legend=closed&m=div)
```

> In this part of the tree, we see two clusters representing likely local transmission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In divergence view, we see two clusters representing likely local transmission.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this zoomed-in divergence view, we can see two clusters representing likely local transmission.
```

> Local transmission looks like a tight cluster of cases from the same location, sampled over time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Local transmission looks like a tight cluster of cases from the same location, sampled over time, with increasing genetic diversity.
```
I'm not sure how to phrase this? But we are in divergence view.

> Local transmission looks like a tight cluster of cases from the same location, sampled over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local transmission looks like a tight cluster of cases from the same location, sampled over time, with increasing genetic diversity (longer branch lengths, representing more mutations.
```
Don't know if that helps! But does explain just a little more?

<br><br>

> Towards the top of this view, we see a cluster of cases from Kinshasa, all sampled between March 9 and March 22.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Toward the top of this view, we see a cluster of cases from Kinshasa, all sampled between March 9 and March 22.
```

<br><br>

> Towards the middle, we see another cluster of cases from Kinshasa, sampled between March 15 and March 18th.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Toward the middle, we see another cluster of cases from Kinshasa, sampled between March 15 and March 18th.
```

<br><br>

> From this, we can conclude that there were at least 2 separate transmission chains circulating in Kinshasa in early March, 2020.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From this, we can conclude that at least 2 separate transmission chains were circulating in Kinshasa in early March 2020.
```

<br><br>

> The DRC reported it’s first cases of COVID-19 to the WHO on March 10. The first sample on Nextstrain was collected on March 9, and was reported in our [Situation Report for March 27](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DRC reported its first cases of COVID-19 to the WHO on March 10. The first sample on Nextstrain was collected on March 9, and was reported in our [Situation Report for March 27](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).
```

<!-- There is no right-side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [At least 8 introductions to Senegal, with 2 local transmission chains](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?d=tree,map&f_country=Senegal&f_region=Africa&m=div&p=full)

Similar to the patterns found in the DRC, here we see samples from Senegal spanning the full genetic diversity of the tree. The phylogenetic placement of these samples indicates that there were at least 8 separate introductions to Senegal between late February and late March. Senegal reported its first  COVID-19 cases to the WHO on February 28, the same day that the first viral sample was collected for sequencing.
<br><br>
As we reported in our [April 3 Situation Report](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-04-03?n=5), at least 2 of these introductions in late February or early March have led to ongoing local transmission clusters in Dakar and Tabou, respectively.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<br><br>
Although the most recent sequence on Nextstrain from Senegal is from March 20, there are [currently 215 known, active cases](http://www.sante.gouv.sn/sites/default/files/COMMUNIQUE%2053%20DU%2023%20AVRIL%202020.pdf) of COVID-19 in Senegal.
```

<br><br>
The first case in Ghana was reported to the WHO on March 11, and the first viral genome on Nextstrain was collected on March 24.

<!-- There is no right-side text --><!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Local transmission in Greater Accra, Ghana](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?label=clade:B4&c=division&d=tree,map&f_country=Ghana,Senegal&f_region=Africa&p=full&r=division&legend=closed)

Here, we see a cluster of closely related cases from the Greater Accra region of Ghana, sampled between March 25 and March 30.
The common ancestor of these cases dates to mid-February or early March, and was most likely imported from Asia.
<br><br>
Interestingly, there is a sample from Senegal that groups tightly with this cluster, suggesting the possibility of a transmission between Senegal and Ghana.

<!-- There is no right-side text --><!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Scattered introductions to Algeria, Gambia, Nigeria, and South Africa](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/africa/2020-04-23?c=division&d=tree,map&f_country=Algeria,Gambia,Nigeria,South%20Africa&f_region=Africa&p=full)

> Here, we see samples isolated from Algeria, Gambia, Nigeria and South Africa. These samples are scatted across the full tree, and are largely isolated from one another.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we see samples isolated from Algeria, Gambia, Nigeria and South Africa. These samples are scattered across the full tree and are largely isolated from one another.
```

<br><br>

> This is evidence for many separate introductions, largely from Europe, to many nations in Africa. Without more data, we can't yet say which -- if any -- of these sparks resulted into local outbreaks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is evidence for many separate introductions, largely from Europe, to many nations in Africa. Without more data, we can't yet say which -- if any -- of these sparks resulted into local outbreaks. The [WHO reports](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331840/SITREP_COVID-19_WHOAFRO_20200422-eng.pdf) outbreaks of over 3400, 2800, and 500 cases in South Africa, Algeria, and Nigeria respectively.
```

> This is evidence for many separate introductions, largely from Europe, to many nations in Africa. Without more data, we can't yet say which -- if any -- of these sparks resulted into local outbreaks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is evidence for many separate introductions, largely from Europe (keeping in mind possible sampling bias due to the large number of European samples), to many nations in Africa. Without more data, we can't yet say which -- if any -- of these sparks resulted into local outbreaks.
```
I think we just need to be really clear about the fact that bias could be influencing that these all look to come from Europe! :)

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text 13-->
# [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=country&d=map&p=full)
#### ...as an individual
* Practice strict social distancing, especially if you are in a vulnerable group.

> * Remember that even if you are not super vulnerable, many people around you are; follow these practices to protect others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Remember that even if you are not super vulnerable, many people around you are; follow these practices to protect others.
* Wear a mask (homemade works well) when in public.
```
